On there today, aren't we, Ian?
Yep.
Okay, brilliant. Thank you, Jo.
Good morning.
Good morning. Are you everyone? You got any colleagues with
you, or it's just you?
Just me. Just me.
Oh, I'm sure you'll carry it off brilliantly regardless.
We've got
five of us in the room. I think we've got one online as well.
I think we're expecting one more momentarily as well, so we are
ready to go.
What I would do-
Thank you
... just can I just say thank you very much for agreeing
to
give us a presentation, and we look forward to asking questions.
We've got you down for 45 minutes total,
with the presentation and the questions.
And just to let you know where we're at in terms of the ports inquiry,
do you know what we're trying to achieve with it?
At a base level, yes.
Okay, good. That's fine. So I won't go through the terms of reference or anything
like that for you.
But we're getting close to the end of the submission process.
We're just trying to wrap that up, and then we will
sit down and work our way through all the issues which have been raised and the
opportunities there might be to make literally the boat go faster-
Yes
... and make the system more efficient and effective.
So anyway, I'll hand over to you,
and
yeah, in your hands.
Appreciate the time. Can I just check in, can you see my slides?
I've got some slides to share.
Yes, we can.
Oh, perfect.
Fantastic.
Yep.
Okay, wonderful.
Simon, can I just check, sorry, just before you start, Simon, can I just check, can
you, because he's online, can you see these slides?
Yes, Andy, I can. Thank you.
Brilliant. Okay, thanks. Right. Okay, away you go, Jo.
Thanks, everybody. Really appreciate the opportunity to appear
for you today and speak to some of the work that the Aotearoa Circle has been
doing. For those that are not familiar-
Sorry, one second.
Sorry, hang on. Sorry. Sorry, Jo. Just hold for one second.
One minute. If she could do it in present
slideshow rather than like this-
You want to do it the full screen, is it?
Yeah.
Yes.
Because my computer is not working
properly.
Oh, okay.
So I need to see this as big as I can.
Yes. Right. Okay.
Is that working better?
No.
No. So I don't mean presentation mean, I mean just start slideshow will be
fantastic, I think.
Sorry.
I'm here.
That's good.
If you go to the first slide and just do start slideshow, then we won't
have all of the ones lurking down the-
Down the bottom.
Yeah.
If you go to slideshow and just
up the top
where it says slideshow. Yeah.
Oh.
No.
Slideshow along the top.
Slideshow. Between animations and record.
Yep.
Yeah.
Yeah, and then you go start from beginning.
It should do. Oh, mine... Yeah, from beginning. Perfect.
Oh, it's still
Not perfect
We still get presentation-
No, look, I think it was-
It's going forward. Yeah.
Yeah, no, look, it's bigger the way you had it before.
So sorry, let's go back to that.
Okay.
Right. Let's stop that then.
In slideshow.
Stop share. Let's do-
That's really great.
Sorry about that.
No, it's not your problem.
Sorry, my computer's not working.
It'll be the interface between the slideshow on your
device and the system here somehow.
He says, sounding vaguely knowledgeable, but not at all being so.
Right. Okay. Away you go.
Oh, it's good.
Slide.
Some of that's perfect.
Okay. Here we go. Maybe that's a little bit better. Okay. Right. Sorry.
That's good. That's perfect. Yep.
Okay. Perfect. Okay. So, for those that are not familiar with the Aotearoa
Circle, we are a public-private partnership,
working to address some of Aotearoa's most significant long-term
challenges
through
the power of collaboration. So we're seeking primarily to strengthen
our natural capital and ensure that we have enduring
economic prosperity and future resilience.
So, I'm just going to share a little bit today about one of our pieces of work,
which landed at the end of last year, supported by Deloitte, which is our
Future-Fit Shipping work.
And the work emerged from, I'll just jump onto the next one,
sorry.
Just to have an overview of who the partners are.
So this work on Future Fit emerged from work we had done on
agriculture, tourism, seafood,
and a couple of other sectors, and through that work, they had all identified
that decarbonization of shipping was both a risk mitigation
priority and a future growth opportunity.
So then when we started the work, we began with the simple question
around how does New Zealand remain competitive as global shipping
undergoes one of the most significant transitions in its history?
And that answer has implications far beyond emissions reduction, as I'm
sure you know. It has implications for the ports, for infrastructure investment,
freight networks, supply chains, resilience, market access, and
ultimately, New Zealand's economic prosperity.
And I believe some of these issues are sitting at the heart of the inquiry, so I'm
sure you understand why maritime matters.
So when we looked at
shipping, obviously,
New Zealand is uniquely dependent on shipping, and at the time of the
report's release,
99.9% of our trade by volume moves by sea,
81% of trade moves by value moves by sea.
That could be slightly higher at this point in time.
And with our nearest shipping partner, Australia, obviously 1,500 kilometers
away, we are at the end of some of the world's longest supply chain routes, so
that strength, resilience, competitiveness of our maritime sector is
hugely
important from an economic perspective.
And also the future success of our
economic sectors hugely depend on it as well.
So while the
sector is changing, the IMO is obviously progressing towards a net
zero emissions for international shipping by around 2050.
So many of New Zealand's key export markets are implementing
mandatory climate disclosure and sustainability recording requirements.
So our trade partners are not only interested in what we produce, but
how those products are being transported to them, and the emissions profile of
supply chains is obviously becoming a competitive consideration.
So when we started this work, as part of our
collaborative approach across the partnership, we involved more than 50
organizations.
And through that process, largely reached the same
conclusion, that
no one single organization, sorry, can solve this challenge alone.
That is quite a mammoth ship to shift.
So future discussions and decisions around ports, fuels, freight networks,
infrastructure investment, regulation,
international partnerships are all interconnected very deeply, and those
systems really do require a systems level thinking.
The cost of inaction, so this was one of the things we got Deloitte to look
at from an economic lens.
And again, these figures were measured against the
projected impacts of the IMO levy that was proposed
last year.
So this was looking at the cost of inaction to the country, and
that was the potential to avoid
losses estimated at between $17.5 billion, I mean,
and $94.4 billion. I mean, they're huge numbers.
That was driven by the emissions pricing from the IMO's supply
chain emissions requirements, consumer preferences,
market access risks, and reputation.
So those are
quite significant findings.
Yeah, so I mean, obviously, the cost of
transition is obviously quite significant, but also so is
the cost of failing to transition, and I think that's what the
economic lens we were trying to bring to this report was
indicating. We know that ports are critical enablers, and
this inquiry is rightly focused on infrastructure and investment needs.
But one of the clearest findings from
the Future-Fit report was that ports are not passive
observers to the transition that's taking place.
They are critical enablers. They can support the cargo
aggregation, enable freight to shift from roads to
coastal shipping and rail, and help accelerate that
decarbonization across the supply chain.
Together, these actions can deliver greater emissions
reductions for New Zealand,
for both domestic and exporters, and resilience and efficiencies.
But it also has implications for-- Just checking my
slides.
Yes. So what we're trying to send the
signal through the report is obviously is that decarbonization is an economic
resilience strategy, and that the benefits, though, will extend
beyond just
emissions. So energy security, diversified fuel
supply, export competitiveness, supply chain resilience, alternative
fuel opportunities, which presents a growth opportunity for New Zealand,
stronger
trading partners.
And so we see decarbonization and resilience as
complementary objectives.
Some of the key findings, obviously we know that larger vessels are coming, extra
infrastructure is not going to be able to meet all the future requirements.
Green shipping corridors can catalyze change.
The scale uncertainty can help encourage investment.
A staged approach is needed. This isn't going to happen overnight,
but we need to start where implementation is most feasible.
The multiple fuel types will feature in the future, and
biofuels are likely to be the earliest form of fossil fuel
displacement.
So the transition presents both opportunities
and challenges.
But these are obviously national questions, not just simply for ports to
resolve.
It does raise questions in our report around
port capacity, freight demand, coastal shipping,
how we structure alternative fuel infrastructure,
energy security,
climate resilience,
and then the value of that coordinated national
approach to long-term maritime planning is critical.
We know that larger ships are coming, and some ports will require
additional capacity.
And those are the sorts of things, obviously, that we need to be thinking about
now.
Some of the recommendations that came through the report was around
establishing a green shipping corridor,
continuing to work in a private public-private sector
working group format, considering to assess our routes, our trade
flows, port capacity,
undertaking more targeted feasibility studies, strengthening our
Trans-Tasman collaboration. They are a key trading partner,
and we have had
indication from Trans-Tasman partners that there's interest
in this around developing a joint biofuels roadmap,
collaborating on infrastructure and trade frameworks,
planning for our future freight and port requirements.
This comes through from assessing the vehicle size changes,
vessel size changes, trends. I see now that the IMO has
also produced a code for autonomous shipping, which is a
bit of a nerve-wracking mission for me, thinking about ships out there being
steered remotely.
Hopefully, that doesn't end up with planes as well.
But understanding your cargo aggregation opportunities
and
updating the national freight demand supply,
and considerations around coastal shipping and domestic freight integration,
because obviously this isn't all going to happen at port
or at sea.
Enabling alternative fuel production presents a growth
opportunity for New Zealand, and maintaining alignment
with global standards will be important to that.
Essentially, the key message we are putting across is that obviously collaboration,
infrastructure, long-term planning
will be as important as the technology that's enabled to do that.
Three messages that we had for the inquiry.
Number one was around maritime decarbonization, as I've been talking
to, as an economic
competitiveness issue.
So maintaining market access and resilient matters is just as much as
emissions. Future investments should anticipate where ships are heading.
So, ports, vessels, freight systems are changing.
How do we keep ahead of that curve and understand the future needs,
not just in the next 10 years, but the next 50 years?
New Zealand needs greater system-wide coordination.
And I think
the culmination of the work that came through the Future-Fit Shipping and the
willingness to participate and find solutions speaks to the
sentiment that
New Zealand companies and the
public sector both want to see New Zealand succeed.
The report also recommended a co-funded Trans-Tasman
Biofuel Fund to support joint research,
feasibility studies, and infrastructure, and investment and innovation.
It recognized that the collaboration with Australia offers probably one
of the most fastest and most cost-effective pathways
for shipping resilience for New Zealand.
So, the opportunity, I guess, is not that global shipping is going to change.
It already is changing. We're already in the midst of that.
And obviously, we're waiting for decisions around the IMO
levy,
but the trajectory is already underway.
So the opportunity now is to ensure that New Zealand is positioned to
benefit from change, but also to build a maritime system
that is more resilient, more competitive, better connected, and as
we like to say, future-fit.
And that relies on the coordinated national strategy,
continued engagement with the sector, but
also the IMO.
Port aggregation or rationalization needs to understand our
future demands, future freight demands,
flows of freight so we're sure that we're aligning with future
needs.
And we talked about the need for a green shipping corridor
where industry and government work together to reduce
emissions through that combination of lower emission vessels,
alternative fuels, infrastructure policy settings, et cetera.
I think one of the biggest surprises that came through the report when you look at
the mix of people that were involved in those conversations, including
ports, who can be, dare I say, at times a little bit competitive,
was that they're all fundamentally aligned on the need to
future-proof the sector as a whole and the country as a whole,
and align on that this is about economic
competitiveness as much as about
assisting the environment.
I think that was the last of my slides. I'll stop sharing from here.
Sorry, that was a little bit of a whistle-stop tour of the plan, and I'm not sure
if
people had a chance to read it. And obviously, when we released it at
the end of last year, there was the
expectation that the levy was going to go ahead, and obviously, that's been
put on hold.
I know that conversations are still being discussed,
but the amount, the costs around the levy are yet to be finalized.
But
I guess the principle about the levy, and
using that money to fund decarbonization
and support emerging economies
from a growth perspective and a resilience perspective is still
as important today as it was last year.
Okay. Look, Jo, thank you very much.
And yes, we have had the report, so
we will read at least a good chunk of it.
I'll start the questions off because given you've just ended with the
IMO levy, and then I've got Dan and Sandra to start off with.
So just the IMO levy, we did have a range of different comments
made by other submitters on the IMO levy.
And we did get-- I think we've landed on the situation which the, as you said,
at least New Zealand's uptake of it has been deferred till
sometime later this year, consideration later this year.
Not sure about where it is with the rest of
potential signatories, but particularly the US.
But I'd be interested in, first of all, your views about that.
The second one that we heard, and it was really in the context of
vessels getting to New Zealand on time and getting around New Zealand on time.
And we had the assertions being made by some submitters that-
They
were saying the levy's already in place, which clearly we know it's not, but
they're acting as though it was. And that means that if their
vessel is behind time, they won't then speed up to get
back on time. So we end up with the whole system being
thrown out in terms of vessels arriving in the window they're supposed to be, and
then they arrive at a time when the port's already full with other vessels and so
on.
So can you just talk us through where you understand internationally we're at,
in terms of other countries' attitude to the IMO levy?
Secondly, how it interfaces with the issue of speed, because being where
we are in the world,
and having, we heard about 40% of vessels arrive late already.
That's a real problem for the entire system.
How that interfaces with speed will be really useful.
And the final question I wanted to ask on that is, because all of this is about
climate disclosures,
I understand aviation is
almost separated out because a lot of it's, well, international aviation at least
is separated out. I'm just interested in how
international shipping
and domestic shipping are accounted for. It might be two different ways.
You understand what I'm asking there.
Oh, yeah.
Where does the
levy for the emissions on the international shipping, where does it land?
Origin, destination or nowhere at the moment?
Yes. Very good questions.
So my understanding obviously is that the
IMO levy
did had a bit of a pause last year with the US in
particular, pushing back. So
obviously,
yeah, New Zealand, as you've said-
... and a number of other countries
are committed to moving forward to a net zero.
But-
Sorry. Say that again, please.
Oh, sorry.
No, no.
Yeah. Just that
other countries, including
the UK, et cetera, have indicated their openness to be
part of the forward push for the levy.
And
I'm just looking back in my notes actually, sorry.
Does that mean are we
in the situation which nobody's yet signed up?
Is that where we're at at the moment?
Yes.
I think fundamentally there's an intent, but-
Okay
... we still haven't quite got across the line in terms of
agreeing on the modeling.
And I think that's the key is obviously there's quite big discrepancies in terms of
implications of cost and who will pick up those costs that are still
yet to be considered.
Just one moment.
And I guess what they're trying to achieve is that balance of fairness and
accountability and climate justice, but
also ensuring that nobody is left behind in the transition, that
everybody can move at the same time.
Okay. And the other part of that question was, at the
moment, and where is it proposed, if it's any different, do
carbon emissions from
international shipping and domestic shipping, because they may well be different,
where do they lie?
Uh-
So we have a ship which is coming to New Zealand from Singapore.
Does it lie with Singapore? Does it lie with New Zealand? Or does it lie nowhere?
Because that is my understanding of where international aviation sort of
sits out in the
nowhere.
Yeah. My understanding is that it sits with
the origin of the ship and the
ownership of the ship.
So the original-
Where the vessel's coming from
... the original origin of the ship?
Original.
Yes.
So Liberia
is responsible for a lot then.
That's inconvenient.
So you think it lies with the origin and the ownership of the ship?
I think so, but I might need to just check on that, because I'm not sure-
Yeah
... that we've gone into that level of detail.
Because if it relies with the owner and the origin of the ship,
the international shipping at least, none of that's New Zealand.
No.
So we don't get pinged for that, somebody else does.
Yes.
So the ship's owner will be ultimately
responsible for paying those levies.
So I guess it-
Now, they may well charge us, that's a different matter.
Well, that's true. Those costs may be passed on. Yes.
So I think that
the levy applies to
ships for operating in a specific location.
So yes, so it comes back to it'll fall directly on the vessel's
owner,
or in some instances, their designated shipping agent, so who's
calling on it. So I think there's still quite a bit of work
to be, this costing model of who's going to be accountable for
it-
Yeah
... to be worked through. But from what I can
understand, though, it is around
the location of the port dictates whether the levy is required and how much
it will cost.
So,
a country or port may be charged an annual levy, but the
majority of that cost will sit with the ship itself, which
obviously makes sense, because that's where they're trying to reduce the emissions,
and they're trying to move
the shipping owners and companies onto an alternative fuel.
Okay. And so that's all part of this conversation that's going on with the
methodology, et cetera.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah. We can provide some more on that, if you like.
But if you do know any more, or alternately-
Yeah
... would Maritime New Zealand or MOT be our other sources for that
to know where we're at at the moment? Yeah, okay. We might go back to them.
Definitely MOT.
Yeah, okay. Cool. Right, Dan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Morning, Jo.
Thank you for your presentation this morning.
My first question is, are you able to send us the PowerPoint that you
presented? Because it's different to what I understand and have read
from the documents you've submitted.
Is that correct or-
Yes. Absolutely. This is an updated one, so I will send that through after
this.
Great. Thank you.
Absolutely.
So look,
the analysis is really good. I like the
frame of the report. I'm just wanting to
get
a really succinct view on Aotearoa Circle's
recommendations. So-
Mm
... of course, this inquiry is about productivity.
How do we boost the productivity of the sector?
I absolutely, fully endorse the view that productivity and
decarbonization can go hand in hand.
I just want you to be succinct with us, because there's a lot of
recommendations in your report.
Where you see, say, the top three recommendations
for this group
to include in our eventual report to
boost productivity and to
speed up decarbonization of the sector.
Just want you to have the opportunity to be very clear with
us, what are the top three things that we should be including
in our report from Aotearoa Circle's perspective?
I think number one is the need for a national port
strategy.
Mm.
I think that's probably the starting point is obviously
getting everybody in the room and getting aligned on, I think what the
circle traditionally does well is when we bring together
partners is, agendas are left at the door,
and we come together and we collectively agree
and work through solutions for what is the best outcome for New Zealand
as a whole or a sector as a whole. And I think that's where
the number one
recommendation would be on facilitating or
enabling that national port strategy, whether that's
through a working group.
And again, I think including
the
private sector as well in that conversation would be key, because we've got
obviously big exporters that need to be part of that conversation as well, not
just the ports.
So I think that would be number one.
And I think that would also enable you, too, to think around
that future flow and future trade routes and where our
exporters are seeing the trends and shifts.
Obviously, we've got huge growth going on at the moment in Southeast
Asia
and the wider Pacific, so
that could change the flow of vessels in the future.
The Trans-Tasman collaboration piece, I think is
also really key, strengthening our relationships with
respective entities on both sides of the Tasman.
I think given that they are our closest trading partner, is also really
key, and their indication to work collaboratively with New
Zealand,
it's an opportunity that should not be missed.
And I think there's great strength with working together closely with our
Australian colleagues.
Yep. Great.
So I'd probably just leave it with the two, to be honest.
I think-
Thank you
... those are the two things to focus on.
That's great. Yeah, very clear. Thank you, Jo.
Thank you, Jo. Much appreciated. Sylvie.
Thank you. Really interesting report and
presentation. Thank you very much, Jo.
I had a couple of questions.
That national port strategy
needs some sort of integration in the national infrastructure plan,
I imagine?
Yes.
Do you see--
how do we deal with it if it is better to have
slightly fewer ports, or for that matter, a lot more, but I
think that's unlikely. Or to have them
specialized, given they all have their independent
ownership and setup. How do you think
central government should be
facilitating, enabling, or
forcing
the ports to fit in with that?
Yes.
It is difficult because obviously there's
regional economic
considerations if you are looking at consolidation of ports.
But then there's also other opportunities that would come
through roading or rail that could support
that continuation of regional
prosperity.
Yeah, so it's a difficult one. But I do agree that it needs to be
integrated into the national infrastructure plan,
given the deficit that we are
facing, I think around, what, 200 billion--
200 million, sorry. Billion? Million?
Billion.
I'll come back on that one.
It was billion earlier.
Billion, sorry.
Billion. Billion. Exactly. Billion with
our infrastructure requirements.
And obviously that's another area that we've recently done a lot of work in with
our natural infrastructure plan.
So yeah, working very closely on with
that. Those things have to be tied together.
So a national port strategy absolutely needs to include consideration
around our infrastructure
requirements, which just means a more joined-up collaborative
approach is required.
And you mentioned road and rail. I'm interested in whether,
um, the Aotearoa Circle has looked at the
potential for
coastal shipping for transport with the Seaglider now having
done its-
Test voyage or whatever you call it?
No, not as yet.
But I think that's something we have to-
That's something we have to really consider.
I
didn't move to New Zealand until after the Littleton
ferry that went from Wellington to Littleton stopped. I would've loved it.
But it looks like it might begin to be feasible for that sort
of thing to happen again. And again, how that fits into a
whole national transport strategy that's
sometimes planes, sometimes rail, sometimes road, and
sometimes sea.
That's not moving freight, but it's moving using ports.
Yeah, I agree. I don't think we should be dictated by what we've done necessarily
in the past. It may not now be
future fit. The future fit solution may be looking at something
completely different, and that includes the way our infrastructure is
developed, the footprint of that.
And obviously,
when you're looking at coastal
risks with climate change, there's huge
considerations required.
Okay. I do have one more question if you want to go to someone else.
Look, we'll go to Tangey, then I've got one, then I'll come back to you.
Great.
Anybody else over here? I'm sorry, can I just ask, Aubrey here is
from the RTMU, and is happy to present to us.
I've got both sides saying happy. Cele, if you are happy, then that'd be
awesome. Okay, cool. Right. Jo. Sorry, Tangey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Jo.
Just following up on your slide around strategic opportunities for New Zealand.
I don't think you'll get any disagreement from around this table around that.
In response to Dan's question, you talked about that kind of international
collaboration,
network opportunities. I'm interested in your observations around
engagement within the sector domestically.
Do you see any particular gaps that might
strengthen those
opportunity kind of touch points?
Well, we obviously had a broad section of people involved in
these conversations, but I think finance is one that obviously
needs to be
is a key enabler, and not just meaning the public
sector, but excuse me, investment from the private sector.
I think that could be amplified. We didn't
go down the consideration route of what the private
sector would look to invest in this, but I think there's opportunities to
consider that possibility. So I think that
they would also need to be in the room.
And iwi obviously is also, I think, an important
consideration as well.
Okay. Thank you.
I just wanted to go, Jo, a little bit further on the issue around
consolidation of ports, because we've had some presentations and some visits to
ports, et cetera. It's quite clear that some of the ports are quite happy to try
and take the business of the other ports.
In fact, that's a large chunk of their proposed growth.
I'm thinking one in particular.
And there might be other bits which you might say, well, some bits come out of the
port rather than port closing. But what was interesting when we had Maersk here,
and we still would like to have one of the other major shipping operators, but they
seem to be indicating that they would still continue to service all the ports that
they currently service, which effectively is all of them.
The frequency, the size of the vessels, et cetera, varies depending on the ports
that they go to.
Isn't that the thing that will dictate
where
the ports are and what they do? Because they don't all have to continue doing
exactly what they're doing at the moment in terms of the types of business they do.
What's going to drive that decision-making?
Is it going to be the ports or is it going to be some external thing or is it going
to be the shipping lines?
Possibly the shipping lines. Yeah.
Yeah.
I would say possibly the shipping lines, because they're
currently considering refiguration for their future vessels,
and those are likely to be larger. So if you haven't got the
capacity for bunkering and things at port, then I think
that's
the driver. It's probably going to come from the shipping companies, I
would say.
That was the thing that I was assuming that
we would hear from them excuse me. That we would
be going for the much larger,
well, particularly container ships.
There's been a lot of focus on container rather than bit on bulk.
But they'd be going for the larger ships, and therefore there'll be fewer ports
able to service them, but they didn't really give us that indication that that's
entirely what they would do. It would be a bit more horses for courses.
You've said that the
shipping industry is undergoing its greatest
transformation for decades. Can you just
unpack that a little or expand a little bit on that?
Is that what you're talking about, about the bigger ships, or is it different fuels
or what is it? Because when you build a ship,
it's going to be around for quite a period of time.
Mm-hmm.
At very least it'll be around for 20 years and probably considerably longer than
that.
I think it's coming-
So what is it seeing this revolution-
Yeah, sorry.
Yeah.
I think it's coming through in definitely in size, but also in technology.
Now we're getting autonomous ships coming through.
The flow of where ships are going, obviously we've experienced
that this year in terms of having to ships be diverted for a number of
reasons.
So there's that piece, and then
yeah, I think
it's being driven by not just the ships obviously wanting
to reduce cost in terms of the number of
journeys that they'll need to do and by increasing their shipping and size,
but also the trading markets and the customers
themselves and the push for reduced emissions.
So in shipping, I know it's
definitely not the largest emitter of-
... emissions in the world, but are still
quite a big consideration for trading partners
who are importing our products and looking at, okay, where is your
biggest emissions coming from? And obviously, New Zealand, we're a long way away
from our key ports, so.
So when you're just talking, just to finish off my question, then I'll go to Celia.
When you're talking about the emissions side of things, is this just more
efficient
engines using the same form of fuel that's been used before as a change of
fuel? What is it we're seeing? Because I am, as I said, conscious that whenever
somebody invests in a vessel, it's got a lifespan.
And that
lifespan may be quite long unless it becomes uneconomic to run
early. But what are you seeing in terms of the
motive power
of vessels?
Yeah. No, and I'm not deeply involved with the motive power of
vessels. But I can say that, its efficiencies in
terms of environmental efficiencies, but also cost
efficiencies as well. So obviously, savings coming through a
change in fuel source.
But yeah, I'm not sure around the specifics of how
fast the ships are going to go, et cetera, like that.
Yeah. So what I'm trying to get is, are you seeing a change in the fuel source,
that they're going to be powered in a different way, that they're actually being
designed and laid down at the moment?
Or is it just that they're getting more efficient because they're bigger and just
more efficient engines than ships that were 20, 30, 40 years old?
I think it's both, but I think biofuels...
Let me just check on my notes here on that. No.
I think it's still
largely emerging, so
around that biofuels, ammonia, hydrogen.
But
it is challenging around, I think one of the challenges that we identified in
the report was, where do you place your bet?
Which is the fuel that most ships are going to be
driving? Where do you invest? Which one do
we need to invest in as a country? So I still think those trends are
emerging, and that's possibly why conversations with our
trans-Tasman partners are important.
Because if we can align on a fuel source that we may need to have,
bank it on either-
Sorry, Celia, I'm going to ask one more question because-
Yeah, that's fine
... you said, Jo, which
fuel source we invest in. But we don't actually own virtually any of
the ships. I think the only ones that are owned by New Zealand, there might be a
couple of the local ones, but that's it.
The bulk of our shipping is owned by somebody else.
It's not our decision, it's somebody else's decision.
And there was consideration, I think, earlier in the report around,
do we need to be
investing in having supply of fuels, alternative fuel stock
in New Zealand? But I think that through the course of the plan,
most of the shipping companies, from what I understand, said that they could get
from Australia to New Zealand and back without having to
refuel. So that would mean that that partnership with Australia would be
important because then they could do it there without having to have that
infrastructure in New Zealand.
Yeah. Okay, thanks. Celia.
Yeah. It's really on the fuel and transport
issue here,
and whether it's cruise ships or cargo ships.
I believe there is some development of probably smaller
scale electric
cruise ships. But I'm also quite interested in the
development
of
whether it's auxiliary or whether it's the main power.
They're bringing back some very large wind-powered
maritime transport.
There's a French company that's constructing its third cargo
sailboat.
Presumably, they have some backup these
days. But I just think there's
some very interesting propositions there, and I don't know if you're aware of
those. And then I have a biofuel question.
I'm not aware of those-
When I was like we'll be sending in brochures.
That's fine. With the biofuels, while
the cargo ships don't need to refuel,
that they could refuel. Presumably
the cruise ships that spend more time around
New Zealand would refuel,
the 10-day sort of trips. But are you
talking the sort of biofuels that could be produced from things
like forestry flash,
forestry slash, sorry,
and agricultural
byproducts and so on, rather than ones where
you grow the crops specifically for the ethanol or
methanol?
Yes. Yeah, definitely.
Feedstocks
and forestry residues. As you've spoken to agricultural
residues,
agricultural waste,
other organic waste, I think
that has been tested on some, in trucks and things in
New Zealand at the moment. So yeah, there is an opportunity and as you
say, not just for cargo ships, but for other
sectors as well.
Thanks, Celia. Simon, did you have any questions at all?
No. Okay, cool. All good. Okay. Jo, look, thank you
very, very much. Really appreciate it. You've given us some food for thought.
And I think we've probably given you some as well-
Yeah
... thinking about some of these things. Obviously, this is an evolving space.
We would really appreciate any further information you've got, but
particularly the slide presentation will be useful because, as Dan noted,
it's not the same, but then the world's changed a little bit and things do move
in the space of, what are we, six or seven months.
Yes. Yeah, absolutely. And we're more than
happy to keep you across developments.
So, I will talk to the team, and we'll get a bit more current information for you.
We would appreciate that.
Appreciate-
Jo, thank you very much. Thanks for making the time available and-
Appreciate your-
... the rest of the night.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Appreciate the time.
Thank you. Bye.
Simon, if you want to stay on,
we've got the RTMU in the room as well,
which was a pleasant surprise.
So, with your forbearance as well, we're going to ask Aubrey to come up and
talk to us and answer some questions.
Hello, ngā mihi maha kia koutou.
Aubrey, welcome.
Thank you, Andy.
It's RMTU.
Ah.
Is that what I said?
You said TU.
Oh, did I get the T?
You got the T.
I got the T in the wrong way around.
I mean-
Maritime and transport, as opposed to transport and maritime.
Well, well, that's-
Yeah
... RMTU, anyway.
Yeah.
Thank you very much, everyone. I won't take up much time.
I just want to focus on a couple of very important points that I think is important
to us. First of all, we were meant to partner with
MUNC, with their submission, but we didn't quite make it in time for
MUNC. So I read through their submission, totally support their submission,
but I also added in stuff that I thought they missed out on.
Yeah.
So one of the things I do want to focus on is our councils
that own the ports, or partly own the ports.
And I have to say that I support
port rationalization in Aotearoa.
Absolutely. RMTU
doesn't gain from a port rationalization
strategy,
but it's cost neutral.
Where we gain is in stability.
So if we rationalize ports and said there's three in the North Island that will
trade internationally, there's possibly three in the South Island that would
trade internationally, we can set up our infrastructure
a lot better. And councils will then spend
the adequate amounts of money to maintain ports,
maintain access ways for ships, and
also maintain stability for businesses that
satellite around the ports of importance.
So that's why we support that. Also, when councils
do have stability in transport and logistics,
it
improves the health and safety of each individual port
a lot better than currently. Because with stability comes
that ability to spend properly, wisely, and
efficiently, and we don't have that currently.
Councils will spend what they see adequate to try and attract the
shipping companies and maintain them for that period of
contract, which could be anywhere between one, two, three,
or five years, and then contract's up for renewal.
And what I've seen over the years is shipping companies playing
ports off against each other. Again, it's the
tail wagging the dog.
I think New Zealand needs to take control of our transport
logistics system for those reasons.
That's the submission.
Okay. I think there'll be quite a lot of questions in various different areas.
Really?
And some of them will not be the areas you talked about as well. Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Aubrey, lovely to see you again.
Kia ora.
And thanks for that. One of the things I did pick up in your submission was that
focus on local rate payers.
In terms of port rationalization that you've touched on,
what would you see as the first steps
in seeking to achieve that? Because rationalization itself is a bit of a journey.
What would you see as the first practical steps that could be taken if we're
heading down that path?
First thing I would say is you need to talk to the port chief
executives to see if there's an appetite for port
rationalization. I have spoken to a couple, and they
obviously work out of the major ports, and they're on board with port
rationalization for obvious reasons, because their port is going to be the port
of choice.
To no surprise.
It's a port of influence, yeah.
As long as it's them.
Up to the smaller ports.
When I talk to the smaller ports, they say, "Hell no."
Yeah.
"We don't support rationalization."
"We're an international trading port."
But what I see with port rationalization is I don't see a
downturn in cargo for those ports if we do the hub and
spoke model.
Yeah.
We actually see the same amount of trade going across
those regional ports as you do with the major ports.
There'll be a bit more uplift in trade in the major ports possibly,
but again, I don't see any downturn
in trade for the regional ports.
Mm.
Particularly if I look at a port like Napier, which is highly
seasonal.
So apples got to go across that port, that's fine.
You can have a set period where they can trade internationally for their
seasonal fruit.
Mm.
But when it comes to supplying Napier with other products
year-round, they become regional ports. So that's the first step.
Mm.
Talk to the CEOs. Second step, you really need to look
at a de-
At a
coastal shipping strategy. You need to get that on
board as well, because a port rationalization
initiative is absolutely dependent on
a coastal shipping strategy and also a rail
strategy.
Oh, yeah.
So you need Kiwi Rail in the room as well, because a
classic illustration of rationalization to a point
is between Auckland and Tauranga,
and Kiwi Rail call that area the golden triangle,
and that's the rail between Auckland, Hamilton, Tauranga.
And they spend bucket loads of money on that rail to keep it open.
But when you look at the main trunk line, they don't spend that much on the main
trunk line. They maintain it, but they don't upgrade it.
So it's actually having Kiwi Rail in to say, "Actually, if
these are the ports of significance, then make
sure that the rail is set for purpose for those ports-"
Mm
... of significance. Not just for that port, but to feed to other ports as
well."
Mm. Mm.
So that's what you really need. And we also need trucks off the road, I'm sorry to
say, everyone.
And I'm talking long-haul trucking, is
what I'm talking. Localized trucking, we need them.
Sure.
100%. But when you're delivering cargo from
Wellington to Tauranga, from Taranaki to Tauranga, from
Taranaki to Auckland, that's all done by road.
We don't need that.
Mm.
Sorry.
Long-
No, you've-
Long
... you've opened up many, many questions, but I'm going to take Celia first.
It's great.
Yeah.
I'm sorry, I had to duck out, so I missed your points.
But, I do think it's the
rationalization issue. There are issues for the
cargo and for obviously the operators and the
workers.
Absolutely.
But how do we also factor in potential
benefits that are not cargo related?
Let's take Auckland, for example.
If there was
a reduction in the space needed for cargo
there, it would have a number of other benefits for the city potentially.
Has that been discussed or raised as
it may not be for the port, but it may be for the people who live there and the
businesses in the city?
Auckland. Oh, my goodness.
Aucklanders don't want that port there.
It's noisy, it's messy,
and it operates 24/7.
But actually, Auckland need the cargo as well.
Mm.
So they have to keep with it, is my viewpoint.
To transport-- And this is the bit that I really don't like, and I think
my member's going to shoot me for this.
I don't see the sense of
ships coming into Tauranga, offloading cargo at
Tauranga bound for Auckland-
Mm
... which is then taken to Auckland via rail, and distributed
in Auckland from our inland ports.
That logistically and economically and environmentally
doesn't make sense to me. What should happen is that cargo should
come into Auckland at that destination and distributed from Auckland.
Mm.
So I don't see the sense in that. It doesn't help New Zealand, Inc.
Now, getting back to your question, how does that benefit non-port users?
Transportation companies would benefit from port
rationalization. I think when you strategize and
say, "These are going to be the ports of significance," you will then have
businesses setting up stable businesses around those
ports to service and run those ports.
I see.
So that's where I see the advantages from non-port users.
You're not directly related to-
Mm
... the ports. And also, your transport logistics companies
can say, "Here are our main offices in these centers," rather
than trying to have offices in
the 13 ports that we have in this country.
Aubrey, can I throw in a couple of questions?
So just in terms of the, I use Auckland as the example, obviously-
Okay
... bigger city, et cetera, and it's the second largest or second busiest port
after Tauranga. But at the moment, Auckland essentially is an import port.
There's virtually very little export going out through Auckland at all.
So we're getting all these imports into Auckland-
Yes
... much of which is intended to stay in Auckland,
but that's a third of the population.
Two thirds of it isn't-
Yeah
... intended to stay there. So a lot of that distribution activity is going
from Auckland to everywhere else around the country.
By the model you're suggesting, you would be saying that actually we want those
ships to drop off some stuff in Auckland, then some in Tauranga, and then some in
Napier, and then some in Wellington, and then some in
Christchurch, and some in Otago, et cetera.
Is that what you mean? Because at the moment, the big flow of
imports anyway
starts in Auckland, then heads its way down, and that's the number one flow of both
trucks and rail-
Mm
... is that flow down
Auckland to Christchurch, effectively.
I'll tell you what I see.
I see Auckland as being a port of significance, Tauranga,
and possibly Wellington. Possibly.
It'll be a toss-up between Wellington-
Wellington and Napier
... and Napier.
Yeah.
I also see Lyttelton and Dunedin, Port Chalmers,
being your ports of significance in the South Island.
It'll be a toss-up between those three ports, Lyttelton,
Dunedin, and/or Timaru.
And I have reasons for Timaru,
because Timaru is a natural deepwater port.
You don't need to dredge,
but you need to spend bucket loads of money to get that port up to
usable-
Mm
... safety
initiatives. So, it's worn down. That port hasn't been maintained
because they-
Yeah
... don't get stability with the shipping companies.
Now, getting back to your question,
Auckland is the major import
Port
for Auckland,
agree, disagree. There's still exports there.
What I'm seeing is also Tauranga supplying Auckland currently,
which I think is dumb.
But what happens is Tauranga are now
doing the hub and spoke model with Brisbane.
So Brisbane, the cargo, I assume from Australia for the
South American market, goes to Brisbane with their
coastal shipping. Brisbane then sends regular ships to Tauranga,
and we discharge and load those ships, and they go back to Brisbane
and redistribute the cargo throughout
Australia. We have a run from South America that comes around, doesn't
stop into Brisbane, comes straight to Tauranga, and then we load and
discharge that ship, and then it heads off for the South American run.
So that's what we're seeing.
Hmm.
So those are the ports of significance as far as I can see.
Mm-hmm.
But I think the transport logistics strategy, the
setup, I think is a bit off.
Strategy is something New Zealand doesn't do very well.
I know.
Any shape of government for a long time, and so I'm not sure that I could
say that there is a strategy around those things, but maybe there can be.
Just the issue, are you talking mostly about container, or are you talking about
bulk, or both in this?
Bulk and container and logs. It
makes sense with the logs because where they are-
Yes
... is where the forestry is.
Yeah.
It doesn't make sense hauling logs from, say,
Wairarapa to Tauranga. That doesn't make sense.
No. But they do all,
look, Fonterra will take the dairy from the Wairarapa and everywhere
else, and ultimately, pretty well all of it ends up going out through Tauranga, or
at least in the North Island.
Can I be clear?
Yeah.
Fonterra take the cargo to Auckland or Tauranga because
that's what the shipping companies have told them to do.
The shipping companies have pretty much said, "We are not going to Taranaki
anymore. We are going to Tauranga and Auckland, and if you want us to
carry a cargo, you need to get it to those ports." So again-
No, the point I was trying to make is that Fonterra has certainly set their
infrastructure up in the North Island anyway to go-
Yes
... you've got the Crawford Street development and so on,
very much to go out through Tauranga, and that all sort of comes together, and
that's what they do. Arena, just welcome.
We have added to our agenda. Aubrey is here as the
president of the-
RMTU
... Maritime and RMTU. I'll get the M and the T around the right way.
Who we've been asking him to come and see us for some time, so we're very grateful
that you're here.
Okay, so we're talking both bulk and containers then-
Mm
... to keep it. Okay, cool.
Right. Other questions, folks, before I go and monopolize some more.
No, you go for it.
Okay.
Just in terms of the
rationalization, there are a bunch of players.
You said that
Fonterra is doing what the
shipping lines want them to do. I'm not sure quite who holds the whip hand still in
this-
Shipping lines
... whether it's the shipping lines or whether it's the major customers because
they come for the major customers.
And-
Actually-
... Fonterra and Silver Fern Farms and a bunch of others,
as Kotahi, have organized themselves to be quite an attractive proposition for
them. So I think that might be an issue of debate about that.
But the rationalization of we still saw from one port in particular,
the aspiration to grow, and that the bulk of that growth came from
taking the business of other ports in that area.
Have you got any comment on that? And they in this case, would rely on some
significant ratepayer involvement in one way or the
other, either putting the cash up or being at risk or whatever.
Do you have a view about that, and also just can you spell out for us the, in terms
of coastal shipping,
what is coastal shipping to you and how does that best work?
Because we're conscious that the New Zealand-based coastal shipping is
much more expensive than the
wage rates and so on, than the international stuff, which currently
operates almost as coastal shipping because the ships will go, they go
Auckland, Tauranga,
Wellington or South Island, whatever they might be doing.
And that's their model. So I'm just interested in what your hub and
spoke, what you see the hub and spoke being
operation being. So two questions there, that the ports cannibalizing each other
and
who actually is running the shipping to make the hub and spoke model
work.
Big question, so-
Yeah
... I have a long answer, sorry.
That's fine.
So what do I see with regards to ports cannibalizing each other?
First of all, I just have to say that I don't see
any increase in cargo volumes in and out of New
Zealand significantly. So if we're going to take
trade off one port and give it to another, there's a port that's going to suffer
and a port that's going to gain. And I'm going to be absolutely
blunt and say that a lot of the ports are driven by egocentric
people who think that their port is the best port in the country.
And they don't care what bucket loads of money they spend to make their port
attractive to the shipping companies.
They'll go ahead and spend it on brand new machinery, infrastructure, et
cetera.
And what then happens is it's on a hope that the shipping companies will say,
"Actually, we like what you've done.
We'll come to you now."
And also, with this type of setup, the
competitive model,
it actually starts putting pressure on New Zealand Inc.
to deliver.
And I mean that by ways of if you're looking at cutting cost, any
company that cuts cost, the first thing they look at is
wages and people. The second thing they look at
is health and safety. So those two things suffer
immediately when you're looking at cannibalizing cargo from one port to
another.
So that's what I see
when it come with this port setup.
If we can get over that and say, "Actually, we're not interested
in people-
people's thoughts. We're actually interested in how this
rationalization benefits New Zealand.
I think we need to take that view. And as I say,
as a union member, it's unusual to hear me say that
I think our members
are going to not like it short term, but long term,
the benefits are there for stability, and stability's the key.
And the hub and spoke model.
The hub and spoke model. What I-
How does that work? The other part of that is
particularly the New Zealand component of that, and how that works or doesn't
work. Because, of course, if it's much more expensive, then somebody's paying for
that expense. But then there's the resilience and
labor, et cetera, benefit too. So really interested in your view on that.
In the current setup that we have now where ports are fighting
each other for trade, the hub and spoke model won't work, and it'll never get
off the ground.
Yeah.
So when we rationalize ports, that's when the hub and spoke model will have to come
into play. And that's going to take a lot of planning
beforehand before you set that up.
And
how I see that happening is that if you've got some
cargo that you want to move from, Nelson
would be a classic example because there's
no rail into Nelson.
No.
There's only trucking. And they're heavily dependent on the wine
trade. So if customers are happy to transport their
wine across to Nelson, then I see Nelson supplying the
international market via coastal shipping.
So a
coastal ship could pick up the containers of wine and take it around
to the international port of significance.
So that would head off to either Wellington or Canterbury.
Wellington, Canterbury-
Yeah
... Chalmers.
Yeah.
And that's how I see that working in the South Island. Same in the North Island.
Certain cargoes that are up for export or import can be
distributed from the ports of significance to the regional
ports.
And you see the ships that carry them being the international ships which
sometimes do that or a ship which is domiciled in New Zealand.
Sometimes an international ship, it makes sense.
Yeah.
But other times I see the international ships coming into one port,
unloading, loading, off they go.
Mm.
Another ship coming into the port of significance in the South Island-
South Island
... off they go. So it creates stability for the international shipping,
and it also
stops the international shipping companies from dictating to New Zealand what
New Zealand does within its own transport infrastructure.
Yeah. So there's a resilience benefit.
Yeah. There's one other point I wanted to make.
I heard you talking about ships and ship sizes.
Mm-hmm.
And new ships.
Yeah.
I'll be blunt and say we get the dog ships of the world in this
area.
Mm.
We get the crappy ships.
In
my 30 plus years of working on the wharf,
I've only seen one brand-new ship come into Tauranga.
And I was the crane driver on that ship, and unfortunately,
I did some damage on that ship accidentally and bent the-
See, that's the problem, isn't it?
I was gutted. I bent the
guide rails down below in the hold, and that was $30,000 worth of
f*****g damage.
Ooh.
And I've never forgotten that. And it was a brand new ship, made a voyage,
everything like that. Oh. But anyway, getting back to it.
The ships-
I was going to say, Aubrey, that's clearly why they only send the old ships your
way.
Blaming the labor.
But to be fair, the ships are not going to get
any wider. They're just going to get longer.
Mm.
So again, that comes down to port companies
looking at their roadstead to say-
What about deeper?
Draft-wise, no.
Right
They won't get much deeper.
And I'm looking at port companies that are looking at their roadsteads to
say, do we dredge that corner out or don't we-
Understand, yeah
... to get the longer ships?
Yes. Yeah.
And if they don't, they don't get the longer ships.
If they do, they'll spend bucket loads of money doing the dredging, but that
doesn't
reinforce the fact
that they might get their ship.
Yeah. Cool. Thank you. Sylvia.
Now, I just wanted to go back to the sort of NZ Inc.
side of things, and whether the current models of
governance and competition
will do best for that individual port, but they won't do best
for creating that kind of a strategy.
Did you have any thoughts about,
for example, Centreport owned part, two different regional
councils.
It's difficult for the directors of the company.
They're meant to be making as much profit as they can
for that company. It's not built in that they should
be also looking at the wider issues.
Some will, but if it's not in the interest of that
port, it won't happen. So do you think there needs to be some
change to the ownership and governance structure of ports
if we're going to succeed in this?
I'd like to see that change, because that's how you'll get change.
If we stick to the current way that they've set
up,
then I don't think we're going to effect the change that we need-
Yeah
... to benefit New Zealand Inc.
Yeah.
So what I'm saying is, do we form a
corporation that says there are six ports,
and they're all going to be governed by this one body, so that the ports are
governed by one governance body.
And I don't know what you do with the profits because I do know that those ports
around New Zealand, and there are 13 of them, were built
and owned and maintained by councils.
Yeah.
Rate payers at the end of the day.
Were.
People of New Zealand.
Mm.
Arlena
Just wanted to follow up on Andy's question.
The loss of ships that have been domiciled in New
Zealand over the last few years, and what you've seen
in terms of trends there. What is happening to New
Zealand's coastal shipping capacity?
Do you see that picking up in future if nothing changes?
I'll go to the last question because I might forget it. Do I see anything change?
No, I don't see any changes. Things stay as they are.
I've seen a vibrant coastal shipping system in New Zealand
in the past, and particularly between Australia and New
Zealand with our products.
I've seen that disappear off our coasts and go onto
international ships, so we've lost that.
We've also lost the ability to control our own
cargo movements in New Zealand.
To be blunt, we actually really don't control our cargo movements in this
country. It's, again, dictated by the international corporations.
Do you have examples of ships that we've lost in the last couple of years?
Union Steam Ship Company, Rotuiti, Rotorua,
the Tasman shipping line, we've lost that.
And also the local ships that I see coming around the coast, plying the
coastal waters, I've seen them disappear and change.
Um-
How many jobs do you think that would've been in the last just two years?
Oh, last two years? Oh, I couldn't say.
Mm-hmm.
I couldn't say. Sorry, Arlena.
I think this is a much longer trend, isn't it?
Mm.
Yeah.
I just wanted to ask you about observations that you have if New Zealand does
pursue a strategy for offshore wind
roles of the ports currently,
not only Taranaki, but others, and investing in the jobs and the infrastructure
that would be required to build out offshore wind.
Are you talking wind farm generation-
Yeah
... electricity generation?
The ports just aren't really quite there-
Yeah
... for even getting things out into the ocean, let alone, um-
I
see Port Taranaki-
Yeah
... a real obvious choice.
If Taranaki can't handle that, I actually do see Westport, I
mean,
Whanganui coming into play there for the barging operations.
We used to do that. That's been put aside now.
So I see that.
I don't see any opportunity for wind farms anywhere else around New
Zealand because,
to be blunt, I don't see the wind,
and the ability to generate the electricity,
it doesn't match up. When you look at Taranaki, there's lots of wind.
Mm.
When you look at the Bay of Plenty, it comes and goes.
Is that something that,
in your leadership role, you're thinking about the workforce needs for something
like that in future?
Always. Try to strategically plan.
It's very difficult when,
in the current environment, to strategically plan-
Mm
... because things do change, and they do change significantly.
And I'll go back to the container trade, which I'm quite up to date on.
I've seen that move in and out of ports reg- on a
fairly regular basis. I mean, Auckland and Tauranga vying
for Maersk Line,
Timaru, Lyttelton, Dunedin vying for that same
trade, and of course, again, Maersk playing them off against each
other, so-
Mm
... I see that happening quite a lot.
What rail investments are necessary to
enable Northport,
and other ports like Invercargill, to reach their potential?
Northport, significant amount of rail investment, I think, is
needed. They've already started that North
Island rail run. What I see is, you've
got the Metro port, Metro Rail, and
you've got freight going through that Metro Rail area.
And I don't know rail too much, but when you mix freight
and passenger, it's not a good outcome.
Mm.
So I see freight actually circumventing some of that network,
if we could. So huge amounts are spent on that if we're going to
do freight. And
the rest of the country, main trunk line, I see electrification as a really
good option environmentally. At the moment, it's from Palmerston North
down,
Hamilton, Palmerston North. I'd like to see it go further north and
further south, again, because as far as I'm aware, New Zealand's
80% renewable energy. We can plan on that.
More. 80%.
80%.
That was a bad day.
Oh, good, I'm going to go back and tell my members I learned that off you fellas.
So, I see that as a really good viable option for Kiwi
Rail. Again,
if we can rationalize our transport logistics system and make it a
lot more stable, you will see Kiwi Rail and other
industries investing heavily in stability.
At the moment, they can't do that.
Aubrey, can I just follow up on some of those
questions because, in a sense, some people have
encouraged not to pick winners,
and others have, obviously like yourself, are encouraging picking winners.
The investment that gets made in infrastructure that is owned by the
state makes a difference, doesn't it?
You know, there I'm talking about upgrading roads, upgrading rail to
support particular ports more than other ports,
and you're advocating for that. So if you do that,
do you end up with decisions actually made by the
market, i.e. ports and by
shipping companies? They say, "Well, okay, I can see you've got a good rail system
there. I'm now going to use Northport, where I might otherwise not have used
Northport." "I've got a good road there, I'm going to use Napier,"
let's say, "where I wasn't previously going to use Napier."
Do you see that happening?
What I see happening in a perfect world is, no, we don't
exclude our international shipping partners because we need them-
Yeah
... to get our cargo out there.
Yeah.
So they're involved in the transport logistics setup.
And they might say, "Oh, we're going to Northport, but now we
want to go to Tauranga." And that discussion has to be
between those companies and everybody
involved
And everybody in the room saying, "This is the best way.
This is why we're doing it. Here's the advantages, disadvantages,"
and then come up with a consensus. So if you've just got a governing
body that sits up there, says, "Oh, we'll do this."
No, you've got-
It doesn't work.
No, agree.
Can I just ask you about the port ownership, which Celia asked about?
The one example we've seen where there is some
cross-ownership is Tauranga. So Tauranga now owning,
can't remember the exact percentage, but roughly half.
51%.
51, yeah, the majority. Roughly said roughly half, yeah.
So, the majority of North Port and also owning the Timaru
container port, or at least the operation-
Lease
... the operation of it. Yeah, leasing it. Yeah, the container port lease.
Is there a model there for ports actually
saying, "Well, we will take a stake in other ports." That makes some sense.
Is that a way that it might work,
that might potentially be encouraged?
I'd have to say, Andy, no.
And the reason I say that is because Tauranga went to Lyttelton, I mean, to Timaru
for a reason.
Mm.
And that was to garner more profits at the expense of other ports.
And-
Well, that's what they're all doing
... Well, that's what they're all doing, and that's why they went there.
So with that in mind,
that won't work. It needs to be
controlled,
not by individual ports, but by some
governing body or even the state. Now, if I could give a classic
example or an idea.
At the moment, we're going through an issue in Lyttelton, where
DP World, a major shipping company, is coming in and looking at a lease
agreement with Lyttelton Port Company
and Christchurch City Holdings.
And so again, that's some of our
profits from that port being taken
over by an offshore company.
That doesn't work for New Zealand Inc either,
taking those profits offshore. It happens too much in this country, and that
needs to stop. So if the state were to take
control of the ports,
that would be one option. It's a hellishly expensive one and
probably not achievable.
But control needs to come from the state, is my view.
If you leave it to individual ports, it ain't going to work.
So how do you get the state and the port companies to agree
about control of the significant ports that we decide are the
ones that will do it?
That's the question.
The other question I just wanted to ask you at this stage was just the role of...
Can you just talk us through your membership and the
functions that they cover? And then, I'm interested in, because we've obviously
had the Maritime Workers'
Union here,
but can you just talk us through the role of the unions in
helping
or hindering the operation of the shipping port
system to make it go as effectively as it can, what the
areas of challenge for you are, but what the areas of opportunity for you are as
well?
Oh, boy, how do I put that?
13 ports, we have 13 collective employment agreements with each port.
Oh, one with each port or 13?
Yeah, one with each port.
One with each port. Right, yeah.
Yeah, 13 collective employment agreements.
Yeah.
There are five major stevedoring companies in the country.
We deal with
two of them,
C3 and ISO, which is now
Cube.
So we've got collective agreements with them.
C3, we have collective agreements in
three ports
with C3, and Cube we have a national agreement.
The functions we do in the port is everything,
from
pilotage to
pilot boats, to tugs,
to marshaling, stevedoring, wharf
maintenance,
everything on the port.
Our members do that work.
And the relationship between you and MUNZ, then?
Very, very good.
Okay, so the functions that they take that you don't
take are?
Right. So the only thing MUNZ do that we don't-
Yeah
...
is coastal cruise and
those seafarers. We don't have seafarers.
That's the only thing we don't do.
Yeah.
What we do have that MUNZ don't have is we have all our rail
in our union.
And so we had
two agreements, which
was MECA, which is now consolidated now into a collective employment
agreement, which covers all rail work-
Yeah
... from locomotive engineers right through to freight, to
maintenance of the rails, bridges.
So we cover the entire gamut as a unit-
Okay
... as a union.
So there is a geographical separation to some degree between you and MUNZ?
No.
No?
Oh, so you don't do some ports and they do others?
No.
No. Okay, so it's just across 13 ports.
Oh, just to help you out, Andy.
Yeah.
The
only port where we don't work collaboratively with
MUNZ would be Auckland.
Yeah.
Auckland is entirely MUNZ.
But every other port we both feature.
Okay, that's helpful.
Any other questions, colleagues?
And can I say?
Oh, yes, go on.
We're looking at amalgamating.
Mm.
Unions?
MUNZ.
MUNZ and RMTU. In fact, we've got a meeting tomorrow, weather
permitting.
Okay. Thank you.
No, cool. Anything else you wanted to raise just to finish off with?
Yeah, can we hurry up and get this consolidation done?
Hey.
Because I'm retiring.
Hey. Look at this stuff.
Cool.
That's been really interesting. Thank you.
Oh, that's no worries.
Yeah. Aubrey, look, we really, really appreciate-
Yeah
... you coming in. Really appreciate the time. And thank you.
You've given us some more food for thought.
If we end up with any further questions, we'll get them through to you, but as we
will to every other party. But thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for coming.
What do I do? I just up?
Oh, it's fine. We'll sort it out